<span id="lab:M4" label="lab:M4"></span>

# Background

Acceleration is the measure of the rate of change of the velocity of an
object by an external force. An object moving in a circle with radius
*R* is always being accelerated, even if its speed does not change.
Since velocity is a vector quantity, a centripetal force is required to
change its direction. The radial centripetal acceleration, towards the
axis of the rotational motion, has magnitude $\\nicefrac{v^{2}}{R}$. The
force producing this acceleration on an object of mass *m* will then
have a magnitude of *m**v*<sup>2</sup>/*R*.

In this experiment, this centripetal force is measured for an object in
circular motion while varying the object’s speed. The centripetal force
is supplied by a string pulling on the mass in an inwardly radial
direction and is then measured by a force sensor (PASCO stated
resolution of 0.002 N).

An object in uniform circular motion requires a centripetal or
center-seeking force to change the direction of velocity vector. This
centripetal force is related quadratically to the speed of the object,
and inversely to its radius of curvature. As derived in your text, the
magnitude of this force acting on an object of mass *m* with a radius of
curvature *R*, is given by
$$F\_{c} = m \\frac{v^2}{R}$$

During each experiment the mass *m* and the radius *R* are fixed by
attaching a small weight to a holder on a rotating arm as shown in
Fig. <a href="#M04Fig01" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="M04Fig01">[M04Fig01]</a>. By measuring the force in the
cable and the speed of the attached mass on the rotating arm, the mass
*m* can be determined from a graph of force *F* vs. *v*<sup>2</sup>.

<div class="center">

<embed src="Experiment08Figures/Figure01a.pdf" style="width:2.9in" />
<embed src="Experiment08Figures/Figure01b.pdf" style="width:2.9in" />

</div>

In order to determine *v*, the speed of the rotating mass, the rate at
which the small pin attached underneath one of the two mass holders will
move as it passes through the gap of the photogate is recorded. In order
to do so correctly the width of the pin needs to be known to a very high
precision.

In this experiment, the force needed to keep the mass at its
predetermined radius is measured and plotted against the square of the
speed of the mass at the same instant. You will repeat the experiment
several times with different masses and at different radii.

# Experimental Procedure

<div class="center">

<figure>
<embed src="Experiment08Figures/Figure02.pdf" id="M04Fig02"
style="width:2.6in" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Experimental Setup for M-<a
href="#lab:M4" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="lab:M4">[lab:M4]</a></figcaption>
</figure>

</div>

<div class="center">

<figure>
<embed src="Experiment08Figures/Figure03.pdf" id="M04Fig03"
style="width:3.3in" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Setup of the data acquisition system
<strong>Capstone</strong> to measure the speed of the rotating masses.
Make sure to adjust the value for the radius in this window to the
actual value used in your experimental setup.</figcaption>
</figure>

</div>

-   You’ll run 6 cases, each with 3 trials:

    -   2 radii: short, long

    -   3 different applied masses: 0 g (empty holder), 5 g, 15 g

-   The experiment should already be setup for you as shown in
    Fig. <a href="#M04Fig02" data-reference-type="ref"
    data-reference="M04Fig02">1</a> with masses attached to both the
    fixed and free mass holders.

-   Remove the free mass holder, and measure its mass with a triple-beam
    balance. Record this in your data sheet. Put the free mass holder
    back on the rotating arm.

-   Select **Calculator** in the menu on the left-hand side on the
    **Capstone** interface. This will open a window (example shown in
    Fig. <a href="#M04Fig03" data-reference-type="ref"
    data-reference="M04Fig03">2</a>) where you can update the radius to
    match the actual radius of your masses. *NOTE*: that the value for
    the radius will change in the experiment, and you need to adjust the
    value in **Capstone** when you switch to the new radius.

-   After setting the radius in the calculator, close the setup window
    by clicking on the **Calculator** button again.

-   There are graphs set up for you in **Capstone** plotting

    -   *F* versus *v*<sup>2</sup>

    -   *F* versus *v*

-   Before data recording starts

    -   Zero the force sensor with the zero button (physically on the
        force sensor) while the connecting cable is slack

-   Start the data acquisition on **Capstone** by pressing the
    **Record** button. You should notice that the program will start to
    record values.

-   Slowly increase the voltage on the power supply from 0V to 10V over
    the course of about 30 seconds. The metal arm will start to rotate
    and you will notice the graphs display the data as it is collected.
    Do not exceed 10 V and turn off the data acquisition (by pressing
    the **Record** button again) **before** returning the power supply
    to zero.

-   Once you have finished your run, fit a line to your *F* vs.
    *v*<sup>2</sup> graph. Select the fit box. In the Curve Fit Editor,
    lock the intercept *b* = 0. Notice the change in *m* when you lock
    *b*. Record the slope *m* in the Data Table.

-   Fit a Quadratic curve to your *F* vs. *v* graph. Fit the curve
    *F* = *A**v*<sup>2</sup> by locking B and C to zero. Notice the
    change in A when you lock B and C. Discuss why B and C should be
    zero. Record A in the Data Table.

-   Repeat the measurement two more times. Calculate the average fit
    parameters for the three runs.

-   Determine *m*, the value of the rotating mass from both graphs and
    note the result in your data table. Explain how you determine the
    value from your data.

-   Repeat the experiment with two more masses at the same radius *R*.
    Please call for help in setting up the experiment with the new
    settings. Note all results in your data table. Discuss already why
    you also need to adjust the mass on the fixed mass holder and not
    just on the free mass holder.

-   Repeat the experiment with the same 3 masses as above at a different
    radius *R*. Note all results in the data table.

# Data Analysis

In this experiment, you measure the centripetal force with two different
radii and three different applied masses for a total of six cases. Each
case is repeated for three trials. The curve fitting to determine the
mass is performed with the **Capstone** program.

For each case, construct a table with a row for each trial including:

-   the radius

-   the applied mass plus the mass of the holder as measured earlier

-   fit parameter *A* from the *F* vs. *v*<sup>2</sup> (linear fit)

-   the mass determined from the centripetal *F* vs. *v*<sup>2</sup>

-   the difference between the applied mass plus holder and the
    determined mass from *F* vs. *v*<sup>2</sup>

-   fit parameter *m* from the *F* vs. *v* (quadratic fit)

-   the mass determined from the centripetal *F* vs. *v*

-   the difference between the applied mass plus holder and the
    determined mass from *F* vs. *v*

-   your estimate of the uncertainty in the radius (i.e.
    radius ± how much?)

-   the uncertainty in the mass from the centripetal force due to your
    estimated radius uncertainty (*Point to consider*: how much does the
    derived mass change if you change your value for radius in
    **Capstone calculator** by the amount of your estimated radius
    uncertainty?)

From the data collected in the six cases you ran, determine the values
of the masses *m*, using the given value for the radius *R*, as well as
the related uncertainties.

# Post-Lab Submission — Interpretation of Results

-   Make sure to submit your finalized data table (Excel sheet)

-   Do the graphs display the expected behavior?

-   Discuss your results. Do your experimentally determined masses ±
    uncertainty agree with the actual mass of the applied masses plus
    mass holder?

-   Discuss uncertainties (sources of, how do they affect your final
    mass values; what would have the largest affect?).

-   What is the precision of your equipment?

-   What are possible systematic errors for today’s experiments?

-   Why there should be the same mass on the fixed mass holder as
    compared to the free mass holder?
